# Data Visualization

## Assignment 4: Final Project

### Requirements:
- We will finish this class by giving you the chance to use what you have learned in a practical context, by creating data visualizations from raw data. 
- Choose a dataset of interest from the [City of Toronto’s Open Data Portal](https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/data-research-maps/open-data/) or [Ontario’s Open Data Catalogue](https://data.ontario.ca/). 
- Using Python and one other data visualization software (Excel or free alternative, Tableau Public, any other tool you prefer), create two distinct visualizations from your dataset of choice.  
- For each visualization, describe and justify: 
    > What software did you use to create your data visualization?

I used Excel and PowerPoint (files included) to create my data visualization. The data was retrieved from Ontario’s Open Data Catalogue in Excel format. I used the PivotChart tools in Excel to pull the "Country of Citizenship" into the Axis (Categories) field and the "Sum of HEADCOUNT" into the "Values" field. Then, I inserted a pie chart to view the relative percentage of graduate students. Some of the values were invalid (e.g., "*"), so I needed to filter them out before generating the visualization.

A similar process was used to generate the bar chart displaying enrollment at the graduate level for institutes across Canada. In this visualization, the "Fiscal Year" was pulled into the Axis (Categories) of the PivotChart, while the "Sum of HEADCOUNT" was set to the "Values." The Gender group was placed in the "Legend (Series)" category. To focus on graduate students only, I used filters to isolate those entries.


    > Who is your intended audience? 
    
My intended audience consists of university administrators in Ontario, specifically those who work with graduate student admissions, recruitment strategy, and international student support offices.

    > What information or message are you trying to convey with your visualization? 

I want to provide information to Ontario university administrators about: a) The percentage of international and local graduate-level students across colleges and universities in Ontario. b) The composition of nationalities among the 33.8% of international students.

I find this information to be of particular interest and value at a time when Canada is implementing drastic changes to policies regarding international student enrollment. We have seen some colleges close down and others lose up to 50% of their expected international student enrollment.

I also want to highlight the steady rise in female-identifying enrollments, as well as the fact that enrollment for those who identify as men has not kept pace at the graduate level.

I aim to encourage my audience to explore and research socio-economic, gender-related, labor market, and cultural factors that may be contributing to women pursuing graduate-level education at a higher rate than men.

    > What design principles (substantive, perceptual, aesthetic) did you consider when making your visualization? How did you apply these principles? With what elements of your plots? 

I chose pie charts for my first visual in order to display each component, such as local Canadian students and international students, as subsets of all students enrolled at the graduate level across all universities in Canada. In the smaller pie chart, I chose a blue color block to represent all Canadian students and various shades of green to represent international students from different countries.

The larger pie chart is positioned to show that it is a subset of all students enrolled at the graduate level, but only contains international student enrollments. Therefore, this pie chart is entirely in green. I have manipulated the data to display only the top 9 countries where international students come from, each representing 2% or more of enrollments. I created another category labeled "Other," where I grouped all other enrollments (less than 1% each). This was done to create a clear impression of the major countries contributing to international student enrollments in Canada.

This visual is designed to prompt further research, investigation, and inquiry into factors such as how much revenue is generated by international students versus local students. It also raises questions about how colleges and universities would fund their operations in light of the new, drastic policy changes at the federal level regarding international student enrollments. Hopefully, this will lead to more meaningful discussions about the quality of international students' life supports provided on campus, and other related issues.
    
    > How did you ensure that your data visualizations are reproducible? If the tool you used to make your data visualization is not reproducible, how will this impact your data visualization? 

My data visuals may not be accurately replicable because I used Excel and PowerPoint to fine-tune some of the colors, shapes, and associations between the charts. I also wanted to use PowerPoint to make the visual presentable at the ministry and federal levels, as it is software that is easily accessible and user-friendly for most users in professional settings.

However, the data is reproducible in the sense that the tabular data used to generate the graphs is available. Users can review it and generate new visuals from it in a straightforward fashion. Since Excel is widely used and well-known, it is easy for users to analyze the raw input in tabular format.
    
    > How did you ensure that your data visualization is accessible?  

Whereas these data visuals are not accessible for people who are visually impaired, this presentation can be paired with an oral presentation based on the notes in the slides. I understand that people who are colorblind may also face challenges in interpreting this data. To address this, I added labels, including percentage data labels for each individual category, on both of the pie charts. It is my hope that this presentation will be displayed on a larger screen to increase visibility for all of the data labels.

Because the data is presented in a minimalist and clear format that is usually understandable by most people and professionals in university settings, I believe it will not cause cognitive overload or distraction due to an overly complex visual. Therefore, I think that I have made it accessible for people who are neurodivergent.

I understand that the second visual, which only has male and female identifiers, may be triggering or feel exclusionary for gender-diverse individuals. Therefore, the scope of the research associated with the second visual should be handled with care.
    
    > Who are the individuals and communities who might be impacted by your visualization?  

1. Current international students in Ontario
2. Prospective international students to Canada
3. Universities and colleges across Ontario
4. Ministries of Colleges and Universities of Ontario
    
    > How did you choose which features of your chosen dataset to include or exclude from your visualization? 

I excluded undergraduate students because socio-economic and gender-related disparities are more likely to be evident at the graduate level than at the undergraduate level.

I also grouped together countries with less than 2% of graduate students into an "Other" category so that the visualization could clearly identify the top 10 countries where international students come from.
    
    
    > What ‘underwater labour’ contributed to your final data visualization product?

University administrators who enroll students and maintain databases, as well as admissions officers who ensure that forms are filled out correctly and that students provide accurate data. People who liaise with the Ontario government, which maintains the data on the government website.

Software engineers and UX designers who update and modify software for Excel and PowerPoint, and who provide smart design options that facilitate the creation of data visualizations.

- This assignment is intentionally open-ended - you are free to create static or dynamic data visualizations, maps, or whatever form of data visualization you think best communicates your information to your audience of choice! 
- Total word count should not exceed **(as a maximum) 1000 words** 
 
### Why am I doing this assignment?:  
- This ongoing assignment ensures active participation in the course, and assesses the learning outcomes: 
* Create and customize data visualizations from start to finish in Python
* Apply general design principles to create accessible and equitable data visualizations
* Use data visualization to tell a story  
- This would be a great project to include in your GitHub Portfolio – put in the effort to make it something worthy of showing prospective employers!

### Rubric:

| Component         | Scoring  | Requirement                                                                 |
|-------------------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Data Visualizations | Complete/Incomplete | - Data visualizations are distinct from each other<br>- Data visualizations are clearly identified<br>- Different sources/rationales (text with two images of data, if visualizations are labeled)<br>- High-quality visuals (high resolution and clear data)<br>- Data visualizations follow best practices of accessibility |
| Written Explanations | Complete/Incomplete | - All questions from assignment description are answered for each visualization<br>- Explanations are supported by course content or scholarly sources, where needed |
| Code              | Complete/Incomplete | - All code is included as an appendix with your final submissions<br>- Code is clearly commented and reproducible |

## Submission Information

🚨 **Please review our [Assignment Submission Guide](https://github.com/UofT-DSI/onboarding/blob/main/onboarding_documents/submissions.md)** 🚨 for detailed instructions on how to format, branch, and submit your work. Following these guidelines is crucial for your submissions to be evaluated correctly.

### Submission Parameters:
* Submission Due Date: `HH:MM AM/PM - DD/MM/YYYY`
* The branch name for your repo should be: `assignment-4`
* What to submit for this assignment:
    * A folder/directory containing:
        * This file (assignment_4.md)
        * Two data visualizations 
        * Two markdown files for each both visualizations with their written descriptions.
        * Link to your dataset of choice.
        * Complete and commented code as an appendix (for your visualization made with Python, and for the other, if relevant) 
* What the pull request link should look like for this assignment: `https://github.com/<your_github_username>/visualization/pull/<pr_id>`
    * Open a private window in your browser. Copy and paste the link to your pull request into the address bar. Make sure you can see your pull request properly. This helps the technical facilitator and learning support staff review your submission easily.

Checklist:
- [ ] Create a branch called `assignment-4`.
- [ ] Ensure that the repository is public.
- [ ] Review [the PR description guidelines](https://github.com/UofT-DSI/onboarding/blob/main/onboarding_documents/submissions.md#guidelines-for-pull-request-descriptions) and adhere to them.
- [ ] Verify that the link is accessible in a private browser window.

If you encounter any difficulties or have questions, please don't hesitate to reach out to our team via our Slack at `#cohort-3-help`. Our Technical Facilitators and Learning Support staff are here to help you navigate any challenges.
